NIDS: Detecting Unbalanced Network Traffic Intrusions with Deep Learning
Overview
Welcome to the Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) project, which focuses on detecting unbalanced network traffic intrusions using advanced deep learning techniques. This project implements the methodologies discussed in the paper:

S. Pavithra and K. Venkata Vikas, "Detecting Unbalanced Network Traffic Intrusions With Deep Learning," in IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 74096-74107, 2024.
Access the paper here
DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3405187

Keywords
Intrusion detection
Telecommunication traffic
Computer hacking
Cloud computing
Autonomous aerial vehicles
Random forests
Long short term memory (LSTM)
Cyberattack
Computer security
Ensemble learning
Network security
Cyber threats
Cyber security
Deep learning (DL)
Ensemble learning
Purpose
The primary goal of this project is to enhance the detection of network intrusions, particularly when dealing with unbalanced traffic scenarios. This is achieved by employing deep learning techniques, including Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks and ensemble learning methods.

Features
Deep Learning Models: Implementation of LSTM and other deep learning architectures to model network traffic patterns.
Ensemble Learning: Utilization of ensemble methods such as Random Forests to improve detection accuracy.
Unbalanced Traffic Handling: Special focus on handling scenarios with unbalanced network traffic to improve detection performance.
Network Security: Tools and techniques designed to enhance overall network security and mitigate cyber threats.
Installation
To set up the NIDS project on your local machine, follow these steps:

Clone the Repository:

bash
Copy code
git clone https://github.com/VikkyMr/nids.git
Navigate to the Project Directory:

bash
Copy code
cd nids
Install Required Packages: Make sure you have pip installed. Then, install the necessary dependencies:

bash
Copy code
pip install -r requirements.txt
Run the Project: Execute the main script to start the network intrusion detection:

bash
Copy code
python main.py
Usage
Data Preparation: Ensure that you have prepared your dataset according to the format required by the project.
Configuration: Modify the configuration file (config.json) as needed for your specific environment and dataset.
Model Training: Train the models using the provided scripts or commands.
Detection: Use the trained models to detect intrusions in real-time network traffic.
Contributing
If you would like to contribute to this project, please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your changes. For major changes or improvements, open an issue to discuss potential updates before proceeding.

License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for details.

Contact
For any questions or feedback, please reach out to the project maintainers at:

K. Venkata Vikas
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the authors of the paper "Detecting Unbalanced Network Traffic Intrusions With Deep Learning" for their innovative research and methodologies.

Thank you for using the NIDS project! We hope it helps you enhance network security and effectively detect intrusions
